Pundits and critics like to blame the twin successes of Jaws and Star Wars for turning Hollywood into something of a blockbuster factory. We can debate the merits of said accusation, but for me it comes down to one simple factor: If every would-be blockbuster, or even most would-be blockbusters were as good as Jaws and/or Star Wars, I imagine most of us wouldn't be complaining nearly as much. That brings us to George Miller's Mad Max: Fury Road. It is a revamp/reboot/sequel for a 30-year old franchise, directed by the original helmer who hasn't been culturally relevant in decades, featuring a new and somewhat flavor-of-the-month actor, and seemingly only existing because of the fact that the property is vaguely known and thus has a token amount of built-in awareness. If  you think that sounds like the kind of thing I complain about rather regularly, you'd be correct. Yet, Mad Max: Fury Road is an awesome motion picture. It's the best movie of the year thus far and I can only presume will end the season as the summer's best would-be blockbuster. Point being, if more franchise rebirths were anywhere near this good I'd stop complaining. It may be rooted partially in nostalgia, but good lord does it artistically justify itself in every one of its spellbinding 110 minutes.
Recommended by
Scott Mendelson

The plot is pretty simple: Max (Tom Hardy) unwittingly ends up helping Furiosa (Charlize Theron) transport several female ''breeders'' (unwilling sex slaves/baby vessels) away from captivity and towards a would-be utopian promised land. You may have heard that this George Miller sequel is one feature-length chase scene, and that's mostly accurate. Yes, there are moments of plot and character development, and the long chase is broken up into three acts, but the film is indeed a near non-stop barrage of eye-popping action and gloriously impressive stunt work. I presume most of the stunts and crashes were accomplished practically. I don't know how much of the action is wholly practical and how much of it was achieved or at least enhanced with digital wizardry. So let me compliment both sides of the equation by stating that I believed my eyes for every single crowd pleasing moment. The only unbelievable part is that no one was seriously hurt or killed during the making of this picture. I cannot overstate the quality of the mayhem we see onscreen, both in terms of the vehicular carnage and how much each crash and near miss matters in terms of the story being told. There are real artistry and poetry to the onscreen chaos. This is a spectacular action picture that slowly morphs into an out-and-out great film.

There are memorable male and female characters, and their respective personalities and desires are varied. Nicholas Hoult has a surprisingly compelling arc even as he spends the first half as the equitant of Swiper the Fox. Some of the women are victims, some are heroes, and some are merely trying to survive. Rosie Huntington-Whiteley has an iconic moment that is both empowering and heartbreaking as she uses her exposed pregnant belly as a human shield, knowing that the reason for her captivity is also the only thing that will theoretically keep her alive. There is a third act story turn that sets the stage for the finale that will likely be discussed at length elsewhere, but I'm keeping it to myself for the moment. It gives the film's extended climax an unexpected visceral and emotional kick. Suffice to say, this is not remotely a story about a strong male hero selflessly rescuing helpless damsels from male aggressors. Without going into details, there are moments where a female character does something or something is done to them that might have made me roll my eyes if they were the only female character in the film. But one of the bonuses of having many female characters is being able to provide a variety of characterizations and presenting male and female characters that are equally shaded and flawed. That this is a wholly feminist movie goes without saying, and that's the icing on the cake, along with the fact that it works as an emotionally engaging movie, that makes it something more than the world's greatest sizzle reel.

Through it all is Charlize Theron as one of the more interesting female action heroes we've seen in awhile. It is through her journey and her triumphs and tragedies that the film's focus comes into view, and it is another bravura turn from one of our more interesting actresses. Tom Hardy makes a perfectly acceptable substitute for Mel Gibson. It is to his credit that he is willing to play basically a supporting character in a film with his name in the title. If it needs to be said, the film's technical specs are superb. Cinematographer John Seale came out of retirement to shoot this picture, and if he decides to stay active he is going to be very in-demand after this one. Jason Ballantine and Margaret Sixel should darn well score Oscar nominations for their editing work here, offering countless cuts that enhance the coherence of the action rather than take away from it. Miller's film is pure old-school action filmmaking, the kind where you can clearly see each beat and the kind where the geography and logic are never in doubt. And there are any number of crowd pleasing flourishes mixed in with the carnage, such as a single brightly-colored guitar player riding atop a truck and occasionally punctuating the story. Lord help me, but I was reminded of the red-coated girl in Schindler's List, as he is a weirdly optimistic entertainer in a grim and dirty world of subsistence.

I have said enough, and I have no desire to spoil the surprises or detail the many individual triumphs contained in Mad Max: Fury Road. Mad Max: Fury Road is a remarkable and glorious motion picture, not just one of the great action movies of our time but also a great film, period. There is an old Detective Comics story where an imprisoned Joker helps Batman rescue a kidnapped child and save her life. When Batman asks why The Joker would do such a charity, he replies that it was to give Batman a new twinge of presumably false hope for each time he would encounter a similar situation in the future. As a general rule, I walk into films like Robocop or Teenage Mutant Ninjas Turtles hoping for the best but expecting the worst. Mad Max: Fury Road represents my false hope from here on out. On paper it looks like everything I complain about, and yet it is an unmitigated masterpiece. And if every past-its-prime franchise extension and nostalgia-fueled reboot were anywhere near as good as Mad Max: Fury Road, we'd have little about which to complain.
