There is plenty here to divert, but little to leave you enraptored. Such is the fate of the sequel: Bigger. Louder. Fewer teeth.
If you limit your expectations for Jurassic World to "more teeth," it will deliver on that promise. If you dare to hope for anything more-relatable characters, narrative coherence-you'll only set yourself up for disappointment.
There's a problem when the most complex character in a film is the dinosaur
not so much another bloated sequel as it is the fruition of dreams deferred in the previous films. Too bad the genre dictates that those dreams are once again destined for disaster.
A perfectly fine movie and entertaining enough to keep you watching until the closing credits.
This fourth installment of the Jurassic Park film series shows some wear and tear, but there is still some gas left in the tank. Time is spent to set up the next film in the series. They will keep making more of these until we stop watching.
An angry movie with a tragic moral ... meta-adoration and criticism ends with a genetically modified dinosaur fighting off waves of dinosaurs.
"Jurassic World," like its predecessors, fills up the screen with roaring, slathering, earth-shaking dinosaurs, then fills in mere humans around the edges. It's a formula that works as well in 2015 as it did in 1993.
Pratt is shaping up as the go-to-guy when Hollywood needs someone equally handy with a quip, a firearm and a vintage motorcycle... Howard's [is] an even more impressive feat given that she has to sprint away from a rapacious dinosaur in high heels.
Not quite a Spielberg-quality blockbuster, but it'll do.
It combines first class effects, a genetically engineered deadly dinosaur, outstanding action, well defined characters and a screenplay that refreshes themes of corporate greed and playing God.
While the 3D beasts are undeniably impressive, their human counterparts remain resolutely two-dimensional thanks to a script that mistakes tone-deaf jumps and starts for emotional arcs.
The Avengers, Mad Max and Tom Cruise suddenly have some jurassic-sized competition for the most fun ride at the movies this summer...thanks Dr. Hammond!
It can't be the amazing revelation the first film was, but "Jurassic World" is a great amusement park ride...and the best sequel to it's predecessor we've had.
Jurassic World is a big, shiny, and entertaining roller coaster ride, though the 'World' is more interesting than the people.
Jurassic World fills the 3D screen with summer-movie thrills and fun.
The nice way to put it is to say it's the second best film of the franchise. It's also accurate to say that it's a pale imitation of the original that's worse on every level.
Trevorrow is having fun taking as little of this as seriously as he needs to.
It's a thrilling summer blockbuster and should be a roaring success at the box office to boot.
Nothing will ever top the original, of course, but this sequel is certainly leagues better than the others.
The underlying theme of man's hubristic drive to control-and commercialize-nature's primal power never gets in the way of its full-throttle fun and its cavalcade of chills, thrills and stupendous state-of-the-art effects.
